Alright, in this video we are going to
talk about data source initialization.
Now Spring really has quite a few tools
that we can work with to initialize
data sources. Now we are working towards
using Hibernate and traditional SQL data
sources. So this will work with any
traditional relational database what
we're going to cover in this video and
you do have quite a tool set here to
work with. I'm just going to look at
initial data source initialization. Now
what I mean by that is we need to create
the database structure so the tables,
the foreign keys and indexes and whatnot,
as well as we want to populate the
database tables with some initial data. So there's a number of different ways
that we can do it, but there's also some
pitfalls in there. So I'm going to go
through a brief slide presentation and
show you about the tools that we have at
our disposal between Hibernate and
Spring Boot and Spring JDBC. Gives us a
pretty complete toolset that we can
utilize to work against multiple
databases as we go through our
development lifecycle and then at the
end of that, after the slideshow is
complete, I'll give you a quick
demonstration inside of IntelliJ and we
will take a look at the data that gets
loaded in the database and data that
gets loaded in an H2 in-memory database.
Alright we want to talk about data
base initialization using Spring. There's actually
a couple things that we need to
discuss here. One of them is the
Hibernate DDL auto. Just as a reminder
DDL stands for Data Definition Language.
So that's the type of SQL we're going to
use to define things like tables and
indexes and whatnot, foreign key
relationships. So anything that deals
with the actual data structure and this
is in contrast to DML which is Data
Manipulation Language. This is going to
be your SQL statements that are doing
database inserts, updates and deletes. So two different categories of SQL and
the DDL auto is,
we have several options there and it's a
Hibernate property. This is a Hibernate
specific thing. It is not specific to JPA.
That's actually a Hibernate feature and
what it allows for, is the database be
graded from your JPA entity classes and
we've been seeing that in action
throughout the course where we've been
not actually creating the database, but
allowing Hibernate to go out and create
the database. So we do have several
options to work with. Now these options
are none, validate, update, create and
create-drop. So when you're set to none,
nothing's going to happen so there's no
DDL activity from Hibernate and it
doesn't verify the database structure
either. Now when I'm running in
production, I prefer to use validate and
that will fail the startup. So if
Hibernate is going to expect a table
that will fail on startup if that table
is missing or a column in that table is
missing. So that will fail your startup so I
prefer not to get surprised if there is a
database problem compared to the JPA
mappings. Now update will automatically
update an existing database schema. I say
use this one with caution because if
your JPA model changes or if there's an
error in it, Hibernate will run DDL
statements to update the database and if
you're on a production system, this is
probably not a behavior you want and
personally, if you are running in
production, ideally you're going to be
using a service account that's going to
be limiting stuff to DML. So your
production database users should not
have DDL capabilities. That's a
pretty basic security thing to prevent
malicious activity against your database
using the credentials of your
application. Now the other twos that we
need to look at is create and drop. Create will do an initial database
creation and then the difference with
create drop is what's going to happen
there with a create drop is when you
shut down the database will get dropped.
All the database schema objects
will get dropped and contrasted if you
just have create and you're running
against MySQL and you go back and look,
the database will still be there, where
with create-drop, it will be gone. Now Spring
Boot by default, we've been using the
embedded H2 database and for HSQL, H2 and
Derby, Apache Derby, Spring Boot is going
to use the create-drop option. Now if
you're not using an embedded database it
is going to use none. So that is the
default behavior of Spring Boot and
this is what's been creating the
database for us. So we've been using H2
and it has been running in create-drop
and you've been seeing the database
commence in the log file all along. Now
we can also initialize the database
using Hibernate. This is a default
property of Hibernate that's not Spring
specific and if we have a file called
import SQL, and it exists on the root
of the class path, it will get executed
if Hibernate's DDL auto property is set
to create or create-drop. So it
automatically do this and that SQL
script can contain a combination of DDL
and DML statements. So you can go in and
create the database with it and then
load up initial data into the database. And this is a little bit different than
what Spring Boot offers. So in Spring
JDBC, we get a data source initializer.
This is a Spring JDBC property but
Spring Boot will by default utilize the
data source initializer and it will load
up a schema from schema.sql and then data from
data.sql. Now Spring Boot can also load
platform-specific SQL files and this is
going to be schema -$.sql
or
data-$.sql and you must set the
property spring.datasource.platform. I
remember when I first initially utilize
this, I thought
Spring Boot was going to Auto configure
that property and that was not the case.
Now one word of caution with all this, if
you're using the Spring Boot stuff and
trying to use Hibernate's import.sql
it can get rather tricky. So I recommend
trying to use this Spring Boot stuff or
the Spring Data source initializer and
you really don't want to be using both
of them. You could, but it's a rather
delicate dance to do to get them both
working. So I would recommend to use the
Spring Data source initializer and get
the same functionality but you won't get
a conflict. I've seen some really weird
stuff where if you are using Spring. I've
seen people complain about the data
source tables getting created and then
dropped and recreated. So you can get
some pretty weird stuff there. So you
definitely want to be using one or the
other.
Okay I've toggled over to IntelliJ and
I've created a file called data.sql and
it's in resources here. We can see that
it is in resources data.sql and
that will be loaded on the root of the
classpath. So this file will be eligible
for being picked up by Spring Boot. So I
am using the Spring Boot, not the
Hibernate flavor. And you can see I've
got about nine insert statements. So it's just
standard SQL and I'm just setting the
description property and I'm going to
come in and change a dialect here and
set that up to, we will use MySQL even
though we are going towards against H2.
I'm going to use the MySQL dialect
because ultimately down the road we will
get into MySQL. So I'm going to leave
that there and then we will get into
configuring a data source later. So we
have these nine insert statements here. So I am going to go ahead and run the
application now and we can see that it
will start up pretty quick. This doesn't
take much time at all to load up these
SQL statements. You can do quite a bit to
be honest in this and you can see that
the
statements were run and there was no
output so that this is not getting
picked up by the SQL logging of
Hibernate, so when this runs. Now I'm going
to toggle over to Chrome where I still
have the H2 database console up and
click on connect there. I'm going to click on it
one more time since we restarted and we
can examine the tables. Say run that
and we can see that my four values have
been put into the description and ID
column was automatically generated. So
that ID value is set there in the
primary key and I'm going to clear that
and we will also take a look at unit of
measure and say run selected. And we can
see that that is that. Now I do want to
point out that we are using the default
naming strategy and Hibernate actually
has several naming strategies and we can
see how we have camel cased UnitOfMeasure. So that is going to get
converted to uppercase underscore naming
convention. So you can see. I'll show you. So we
have unit underscore of underscore
measure and that is from the camel
casing of the Java class. So this is one of the default naming strategies of
Hibernate and that's how I know
the naming convention. So I was able to
follow that and generally SQL is going
to be case insensitive for table and
column names unless you make it
sensitive, which I will avoid doing
before this because I personally believe
that your database columns and table
names should be case insensitive. It
really causes a headache when you do
make them sensitive and it's not very
consistent across databases. Alright
you can see that we do have a pretty
diverse set of tools that we can utilize
to initialize the data source for the
database that we are working against. Now
you need to think about this in context. If you're are doing development chances
or you going to run against an
in-memory data source at first and then
probably MySQL or maybe Oracle or
hopefully not Microsoft's databases, but
you can stay on a real database. But you
will probably go from an in-memory
database while you're doing local
development to a permanent database.
Something that's going to be on a database
server and like in your QA system or
your production system. So these
settings will give you tools to work
with that. So when you're in development
obviously you're going to be
initializing data and the database
structure and production that's probably
going to be locked down. So this gives us
different tool sets that we can utilize
along the way. And when we get further
down in the course we are going to start
using MySQL and I'll show you exactly
how to set all that up and you'll see
how these tools can work together to
really give us a powerful tool set here
for working with databases.